---
lyout: post
title: Qualia, and memory?
category: 哲学
truncated_preview: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

If we could name, individuate and identify qualia, then there must be a way by which we recognize the very features of them, the very features that make qualia different from others. Can we really recognize the difference between qualia? The answer seems yes. The taste of sugar is sweet and the taste of pill is bitter; the experiences of these two tastes are different – we know it, and when we eat a candy we know what we expect, as well as knowing that that of coffee is another kind.

What is the faculty  used to recognize these features? One answer is memory. No doubt these features contact with us in the way of being experienced. We know what experience we are expecting when we eat a candy because we have the memory about the past experience of eating the candy. When we ate our first candy, we had, and then memorized that very experience brought by our tongue: it was good, we liked it, and couldn’t help to have the next one. Our parent taught us that this feeling of taste is called sweet. ‘Sweet’ became our tag for that very experience. Then, one day, we got cold and were asked to take a little pill. It looked like the candy but gave us an utterly distinct experience; we certainly did’t like it and wanted more candy. Why did we want candy instead of pill? Because we remembered the experience of the sweet taste which, as we had discovered, is better than that of bitter taste. So the memory is the faculty we use to recognize the very features – the individuating features – of qualia.

<!--more-->

Does memory matter? Poor John, who has lost all his memories of tastes in an accident, wonders what the candy in front of him tastes like. He remembers he has eaten the candy of same brand and the taste of it is called ‘sweet’; he also remembers he likes this taste, but he just can’t remember what this taste is like. He then puts it in the mouth, starting to experience its taste. ‘This is good,’ says he. John still likes the sweet taste, no surprise, because human beings have been evolved to love sugar. The question is what John liked before he ate that candy. Or would John want to eat the candy in that point of time, like someone who loves the sweet taste? John knew that he likes the sweet tastes all the time, but it is dubious that he liked the sweet tastes before the accident: how can we like something we don’t know (to know what a quale is is to have experienced this quale)? Some example show we can. We may forget how delicious the fried chicken is (since I like it!), we just remember it is delicious; and since we remember it is delicious, we are delighted to be invented to a fried chicken party. So, remembering how the fried chicken tastes like and remembering it tastes good are different; the latter is a value judgement rather than a memory about the past experience. Likewise, John remembers the sweet taste is good, and as this judgement retained, he tends to eat the candy, i.e., he likes the candy.

Take another example. An evil scientist rebuilds the sleeping Jack’s brain with a mysterious surgery, switching Jack’s memory of the sweet taste with the bitter. When Jack wakes up, he finds the candy tastes the way the pill tastes. Will he still like candy? Let’s call Jack’s experience of sweet and bitter before the surgery ‘SWEET’ and ‘BITTER’.

1. Jack won’t like candy anymore, because candy tastes BITTER to him, and he doesn’t like BITTER.
2. Jack will still like candy; he will love BITTER.

The first one is intuitively plausible. Jack has the memory of experiencing BITTER, and he doesn’t like that memory. Now, the candy recalls this memory, so Jack won’t like candy anymore. So far so good, but this isn’t the whole story. A Goodness may have its past and you may love something you used to hate. We know ‘liking’ is a value judgement and this judgment has a biological base. Before the surgery, Jack loved the candy that gave SWEET and hated the pill that gave BITTER because the SWEET thing is generally good for him and the BITTER thing is generally bad. The question is, again, what John liked. Did John like the sweet thing or SWEET thing? The sweet thing is the thing that is ordinarily sweet; the SWEET thing is the thing that gives SWEET. Candy is still sweet now but, for Jack, isn’t SWEET anymore. Was Jack’s tendency, characterised with the value judgement, toward sweet or SWEET? This is a hard question I think. We know SWEET didn’t play any role in making Jack to love the candy when he ate his first candy: it is a contingent fact that the candy tastes SWEET for Jack. But we can’t deny that SWEET did play a certain role: Jack identified the sweet thing by SWEET. Does that mean Jack started to like SWEET after he ate the first sweet thing? My opinion is yes and no. Yes, because Jack intrinsically liked candy and candy did give Jack SWEET. No, because Jack’s tendency toward candy wasn’t triggered by SWEET but the physical fact of candy, as well as his own physical fact: when Jack ate the candy any time before the surgery, his taste buds detected the sugar involved in candy and sent a signal to his brain; his brain then generated an emotion called generally relevant to ‘liking’ and command his body to grab more candies. Where is the place for SWEET? Well, the emotion of ‘liking’ may be significantly important here, but emotion isn’t identical to quale. So I think there is a ‘if’ that could make the conclusion 1 failed: if loving SWEET is just an illusion. If we like candy not because we like the very experience of its taste, then whatever this experience would be, we will still like candy.

How could we know this ‘if’ is correct? What if qualia have some ’emotion recalling’ feature? What if, for example, SWEET is intrinsically felt good by Jack? Well, this gives qualia some biological function. It is another hard problem. But I think biologists haven’t find any evidence for this yet. My naïve discussion just want to show that our memories about qualia have no connection to  ‘liking’. But there are many other questions relevant here.

# My further thought: Any conceptual framework when there comes qualia? Dennett’s Coffee Taster

In the above, I discussed the immediacy  of our introspection. The immediacy matters because it denies that we rely on any conceptual framework when come to introspect something. Undoubtedly, we should know that there must be several objections to this immediacy. One is Dennett’s. Well, Dennett (1988) doesn’t say too much about immediacy, but one of his ‘intuition pumps’, designed to argue against the existence of qualia, shows the possibility that we could be confused about what our introspection tells us.

In his *Intuition Pump 7*, Chase and Sanborn, two coffee-tasters, complain that they no longer like the taste of Maxwell coffee they enjoyed six years ago. Chase thinks the taste of coffee is the same as six years ago but his preference changed; while Sanborn thinks his preference stays constant but the taste changed. Dennett invites us to consider if there is a difference between Chase and Sanborn. Is there? Well, if Chase and Sanborn are correct, then there is. But the problem is how we can know the difference. Chase, for example, may mistakenly think the quale has been changed while what changed is actually his preference (similar to Sanborn’s view). This situation would lead to the same result as what Chase states, even Chase himself can’t tell them apart. What does that mean? That means Chase could be wrong about the quale of taste. If Chase were always right about his own experiences, then he wouldn’t be confused about what really changed over six years; his reactions toward two situations would be different. But his reactions are the same, thus he could be wrong about qualia.

What is it meant to immediacy and conceptual framework? For immediacy, if the immediacy is true, then qualia, by definition, are just whatever we experience; but the failure of infallibility implies the possibility of  our misconceiving what we experience, and the gap between what we think what we experience is and what we experience is appears, therefore the immediacy is dubious. Moreover, since our preference may affect what we take a quale to be, our contact with qualia, at least in the case where the preference plays the role, relies on some intermediary, which is a conceptual framework in Patricia Churchland’s view; thus the immediacy is problematic. Introspection, then, is challenged in two respects: immediacy and infallibility.