# Why Does Time Seem to Pass?
Simon Prosser (2012)

#perception/time #time

---

# Summary
1. According to the B-theory, the passage of time is an illusion. Therefore, the B-theory requires an explanation of this illusion.
2. This paper provides such an explanation.
3. The explanation consists in a methodological proposal and a hypothesis.
4. The methodological proposal: It focuses on the representational content of the element of experience by virtue of which time seems pass.
5. The hypothesis: The experience of change involves the representation of something enduring, rather than perduring, through any change.

---

# Definitions and Ideas
## Background Ideas
**The B-theory**
1. The passage of time is an illusion.
2. Times are objectively ordered; no time is objectively past, present or future.
3. The B-theory is satisfactory until it explains the illusion of passage because it seems to us that we experience time passing.

**The specious present**
1. Where the content of experience encompasses an extended period rather than an instant.
2. William James (1809): A succession of experiences is not sufficient for an experience of succession.
3. If change involves a succession of states, then the perception of change must encompass more than an instant.

**Intentionalism in the philosophy of perception**
The phenomenal character of a perceptual experience supervenes on its representational content.

**Projectivism in the philosophy of perception**



---

# Issues and Arguments
> The Methodology: To explain why time is experienced as passing, it is sufficient to state the representational content of the relevant element of experience and explain why it has that representational content.

**FOR** We can turn to recent work in the philosophy of perception; in particular, intentionalism. An relatively uncontroversial version of intentionalism:
1. All perceptual experiences have representational contents.
2. These contents correlate intrasubjectively with phenomenal characters.

**FOR** To explain why one's experience has a certain phenomenal character, a sufficient answer may be: because the experience has a certain representational content.
1. We may only want to know why one's experience has this phenomenal character rather than another.
2. In this case, we need not explain the phenomenology per se.
3. An answer about representation is sufficient; such an answer can explain why one's experience has this phenomenal character rather than another.

**FOR** We often explain illusions in this modest way.
1. For example, we explain the illusion of Muller-Lyer arrows by explaining that the two lines are represented differently.
2. We do not explain the phenomenal character itself. But the illusion is nonetheless explained.
3. Perhaps all illusions can be explained in this way.

**FOR** There is a weak correlations between representational contents and phenomenal characters, but this modest explanation is consistent whit it.
1. For example, due to spectrum inversion, two subjects have experiences about the same colour with different phenomenal characters.
2. We may explain why one subject has the kind of experience by saying that her experience represents this colour.
3. It is a different question why the two subjects' experiences differ in phenomenal characters.

**FOR** Therefore, we can explain why one seems to have the experience of time passing by explaining the relevant representational content. In particular, the answer has two parts:
1. What is represented by the experience of time passing?
2. Why is it represented?

**AGST** According to the B-theory, the passage of time is an illusion. But how can experience represent a necessarily uninstantiated feature of the world?
1. To represent a feature of the world, an experience should at least have some causal relation with this feature.
2. But if this feature is necessarily uninstantiated, then the experience cannot have a causal relation with it.
3. Moreover, other theories of representation also disallow experiences to represent necessarily uninstantiated feature of the world.

**RSP** The author argues that his approach is to proceed with the representationalist account, offering an satisfactory explanation of the phenomenology of temporal passage.

>The experience of time passing represents a necessary falsehood.

**FOR** No contingent proposition can be the content of passage experience.
1. Suppose S veridically perceives that P, where P is any contingent proposition.
2. S also experiences time as passing.
3. S's experiences of time passing and the perception of P phenomenologically distinct, and hence have different representational contents.
4. Therefore, the content of S's experience of time passing is not contingent.

**FOR** If the content of S's experience of time passing is not contingent, then it must be a necessary falsehood.
1. Given the B-theory, the experience of time passing is an illusion.
2. Therefore, given that its content is not contingent, it is a necessary falsehood.

>What is this necessary falsehood? 




 

---

# Questions and Brainstorm
This presupposes the representationalist view of perception.

There is a syndrome the patient of which perceives the world in a very slow motional way. (Akinetopsia)